chore: Add SPECIFICATION (#1)
RedHatInsights/insights-ansible-playbook-verifier: SPECIFICATION.md

# Playbook specification

This document describes the exact format required by the Ansible playbook verifier.

```yaml
---
- name: Example playbook
  hosts: localhost
  become: yes
  vars:
    insights_signature_exclude: /hosts,/vars/insights_signature
    insights_signature: !!binary |
      base64 binary blob containing the embedded GPG signature
  tasks:
    - name: Display debug message
    - ansible.builtin.debug:
        msg: The signed playbook says hello!
```

## Only one playbook may be present

> In case there are multiple playbooks present in the file, only the first one will be verified. Any other playbook is explicitly ignored.

Author: I see you've started the review before we met; I've updated the text since.

# Playbook specification

This document describes the exact format required by the Ansible playbook verifier.

```yaml
---
- name: Example playbook
  hosts: localhost
  become: yes
  vars:
    insights_signature_exclude: /hosts,/vars/insights_signature
    insights_signature: !!binary |
      base64 binary blob containing the embedded GPG signature
  tasks:
    - name: Display debug message
    - ansible.builtin.debug:
        msg: The signed playbook says hello!
```

In case there are multiple plays present in the playbook file, all of them MUST be verified. Validation issue in any of them MUST result in a failure.

## Booleans

Different YAML versions differ in how they interpret all the booleans the specification allows. The playbook verifier uses YAML 1.2.

The following values MUST evaluate to boolean: `true`, `True`, `TRUE`.

The following values MUST stay as strings: `y`, `Y`, `yes`, `Yes`, `YES`, `on`, `On`, `ON`.

When serialized into string, `true` MUST be formatted as `True`, `false` as `False`.

> 

Reviewer: So, the current signing tool will change 'True' or 'True' to 'true' when it outputs a signed playbook, but these get serialized as 'True' when calculating the hash.  As a result, curiously, you can change 'true' to 'TRUE' or 'True' in a signed playbook without invalidating the signature...

# Playbook specification

This document describes the exact format required by the Ansible playbook verifier.

```yaml
---
- name: Example playbook
  hosts: localhost
  become: yes
  vars:
    insights_signature_exclude: /hosts,/vars/insights_signature
    insights_signature: !!binary |
      base64 binary blob containing the embedded GPG signature
  tasks:
    - name: Display debug message
    - ansible.builtin.debug:
        msg: The signed playbook says hello!
```

## Only one playbook may be present

In case there are multiple playbooks present in the file, only the first one will be verified. Any other playbook is explicitly ignored.

> **Warning:** Even though only the first playbook is verified, all of them may be emitted to standard output after the verification.

Reviewer 2: "all of them may", or "all of them will"? since this is a specification, it ought to be clear on the behaviour

<details>

<summary>Example</summary>

```yaml
# valid
- name: Example playbook
  hosts: localhost
  ...
```
```yaml

> # invalid

Reviewer 2: hmm "invalid" IMHO is not correct: this yaml file will be processed, and only the first play will be verified

my suggestion here is to drop this "invalid" comment, and add something like
```yaml
# this and any playbook that follows is not verified
```
right before the 2nd play

- name: Example playbook
  hosts: localhost
  ...
- name: Another playbook
  hosts: localhost
  ...
```

</details>

## Booleans

YAML parsers may differ in how they interpret all the booleans the specification allows.

The following values MUST evaluate to boolean: `true`, `True`, `TRUE`.

> The following values MUST stay strings: `y`, `Y`, `yes`, `Yes`, `YES`, `on`, `On`, `ON`.

Reviewer 2: hint: "stay _as_ strings"

When serialized, `true` must be formatted as `True`.

## Unquoted YAML aliases

The document MUST NOT contain string-like values that could parse as aliases.

<details>

<summary>Example</summary>

```yaml
serve:
  - /robots.txt
  - /favicon.ico
  - *.html
```

While it may parse correctly in some libraries, the reference implementation errors out:

```py
found undefined alias '.html'
  in "<unicode string>", line 15, column 9:
    - *.html
      ^ (line: 15)
```

</details>

## YAML tags

YAML specification defines tags, denoted by `!` prefix. While the tags get parsed by the reference implementation without raising an error, their serialization is not static and they MUST not be used.

<details>

<summary>Example of mismanaged serialization</summary>

```yaml
serve:
  - /robots.txt
  - !.git
```
```py
('serve', ['/robots.txt', <insights.client.apps.ansible.playbook_verifier.contrib.ruamel_yaml.ruamel.yaml.comments.TaggedScalar object at 0x7fd9ad7ebdc0>])
```

</details>

## Unicode

Unicode support exists since RHEL 8. In RHEL 7, Python 2.7 is used, which ignores all non-ASCII characters.

If the playbook targets RHEL 7, characters outside of ASCII range MUST NOT be used.

> For systems targeting RHEL 8 and over, characters outside of the ASCII range MUST be encoded as `\x00`. <!-- TODO: mention endianness -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For systems targeting RHEL 8 and over, characters outside of the ASCII range MUST be encoded using `\x` escapes -- e.g. `š` -> `\xc5\xa1`. <!-- TODO: mention endianness -->
```

also add whether the `\x` escapes need to be lowercase or uppercase

> For systems targeting RHEL 8 and over, characters outside of the ASCII range MUST be encoded as `\x00`. <!-- TODO: mention endianness -->

Reviewer 2: rather than mention RHEL, i'd only mention the version of Python, i.e. Python 2 vs 3

Non-ASCII characters SHOULD NOT be used unless absolutely necessary.

<details>

> <summary>Example of Python 3 x 2.7 differences</summary>

Reviewer 2: "3 x 2.7" -> "3 vs 2.7"

```

Python 2:

```
ordereddict([('name', 'The emoji hackers'), ('become', 'yes'), ('vars', ordereddict([('insights_signature_exclude', '/hosts,/vars/insights_signature')])), ('tasks', [ordereddict([('name', 'Detect files used by Czech actors'), ('ansible.builtin.find', ordereddict([('paths', '/ttiv/hrue'), ('recurse', True)]))]), ordereddict([('name', 'Detect files used by gen-z hackers'), ('ansible.builtin.find', ordereddict([('paths', ['///', '/usr/bin/', '/usr/bin/ - /var/lib//'])]))])])])
```

</details>

# Verification specification

Before the hash is computed and checked against its GPG signature, the playbook has to be cleaned up and serialized. For this, we use the reference implementation as a specification.

## Variable cleanup

Each playbook MUST define variable `/vars/insights_signature_exclude` that describes which fields may be excluded.

The only allowed top-level keys that may be excluded are: `/hosts`, `/vars`. Exclusion of any other top-level key MUST result in a failure.

> Request to delete a key not present in the playbook MUST result in a failure.

Reviewer 2: "delete" -> "exclude" for consistency with the above paragraphs
